Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we're going to create our first plug in now before we worry about making our plug in,
do anything that's actually useful or complex.
Let's first just learn the basics of how and where to create a plug in in the first place.
So in this video, let's imagine our goal is to create a plug in that dynamically adds an extra sentence
at the end of a blog post detail screen.
So if I go into this single post, so imagine we want our plug in to dynamically add an extra sentence
at the end of a blog post.
That's our goal in this video.
OK, and then once we're familiar with just creating a super basic plug in, then we can learn how to
do actually useful things.
So do this with me.
Let's go create a new folder for a new plug in.
At this point in the course, you know how to find the folder with your WordPress installation in it.
So this would be where there's the folder called WP content.
Let's look inside WP content and then there will be a folder named plug ins.
Let's go inside the plug ins folder, OK, and then just create a brand new folder for this plug in
that we're about to create a new folder.
You can name it whatever you'd like, but give it a unique name that you don't think any other plugin
has ever used before.
So, for example, I will name it our first unique plug in.
OK, then go ahead and open this up in voice code or your text editor of Choice.
Next, let's create a new file in this folder.
You can name this file after the folder name for your plug in.
So, for example, you could call it our first unique plug in dot p, but it will also work if you just
name this just about anything, you could name it, test B, but just as a best practice, you could
give it a relevant name to your plug in folder as well.
So that's what I'll go with.
Now inside this file, let's open up.
And then right after that opening line, let's jump into a comment so forward slash asterisk and then
down on a new line, you can close out of the comment with asterisk forward slash.
Now, in between that right about here, we can just start giving WordPress a little bit of info about
our plugin so we can say plug in name Colen and then you can name it whatever you want.
Let's call it our test plug in.
Now, while this can be whatever you want, this does need to be exactly plug in name, right.
This is an attribute that WordPress is looking for.
We can also give it a quick description, a truly amazing plug in.
We can say that its version lets go with 1.0.
We can say who the author is.
You can add a link to your website or the plug ins website by saying author you r.i calling and then
just paste in a U rl.
OK, and for now that's all of the properties that we need in the future.
We'll learn about how to make our plugin easy to translate into other languages.
And when we get to that, we will circle back and add a few additional properties in this comment section.
For now though, let's just go ahead and save this file.
And then back in WordPress if we go into the admin dashboard.
And then in the sidebar, look for plug ins.
Well, now in this list of plug ins, we see our test plug in and there's the description, there's
the version number and there's the author.
So just like any other plug in, let's go ahead and activate it.
Now, we activated our plug in, but our plug in doesn't do anything yet, so let's actually add a bit
of useful code now.
So remember, in this video, we just want to dynamically add a sentence to the very end of a blog post
for the permalink or single view of posts.
So here's how we can do that right below this.
Let's add a filter.
So add filter.
Be sure to have a semicolon after we call that, and then we're just going to give it to arguments here.
So A comma, B as placeholders.
The first argument instead of this a placeholder would be quotes, the underscore content.
WordPress has all sorts of different filters that we can hook on to.
This one is aptly named.
I think you can guess what it's going to do.
It's going to allow us to filter or change the content for a post.
So for the second argument, we just give it a function.
You could include an inline or anonymous function here, but instead just to stay organized right below
this, we could create a named function, give it whatever name you want.
Let's go with ADD to end of post parentheses curly brackets.
Now, a quick note that I want to add about function names here is that you do want to choose function
names that won't conflict with other plug ins or even the core of WordPress itself.
So for right now, be sure to choose a unique name.
However, I do want to let you know that in a future lesson I will show you how to use classes in PHP,
and this will allow us to avoid that issue of having to choose super unique function names.
But we need to learn how to walk before we can run.
So we'll get to that later.
Anyways, for now, let's adjust this line.
So instead of B, we would just give it a reference to our functions of quotes.
I named it add to end of post.
You might have named it something different.
Just make sure it lines up.
OK, now in our function definition, in these parentheses, we do want to receive a parameter.
So let's say a dollar sign content.
Now inside the body of this function, we can use the incoming content and we can use that to create
a new string of text that we return.
So, for example, return now.
We don't want to return just literally the exact same version of the blog post content.
Instead, we would want to return that plus so we could use a period to concatenate on something else.
And let's just add on a string of text.
So quotes and maybe let's add on an HTML paragraph that says My name is Brad and you could use your
name.
Let's give this a save and test it out.
So if I go back to the front end of my site and view a blog post, details screen cool down at the bottom
we see my name is Brad.
Now, just to make it clear how this is working, if you removed dollar sign content and the dot here
and you just returned that string of text, that's all you would see.
So the idea's content is the content that's actually being stored in the database for that real blog
post.
And then you can use that to create whatever string you want to create and then you just return that
as a whole.
And that's what WordPress is going to use when your front end template calls the content and you put
that back refresh.
Cool.
One last thing that I do want to cover in this video is what if we only wanted to add this extra sentence
on a detail view for a blog post?
For example, if you had other pages that use the content to display the content, maybe you don't want
to use this filter everywhere.
So a common technique here would just be to wrap this line within an if statement.
So within our function, here's what I would do.
Take this return line and cut it into your clipboard.
And then I would just write an if statement.
I would say if parentheses curly brackets for the condition.
I would say if is underscore single parentheses to call it, and so double ampersand and only if this
is the main query.
So is main query parentheses to call that.
So this is just my way of saying only if you're on a single screen for a post and only if it's the main
query, because sometimes a template might load or loop through other secondary posts, maybe down in
the footer or in the sidebar.
So this is just saying only for the main or primary post for this U.
RL So in the if block you could just paste back in your clipboard and then if this is not true, we
would just want to return content without manipulating it at all.
Now we don't even really need an else block here.
A function will end as soon as you return something.
So if this is true, this will end from this return, so then below this if statement, we can just
return dollars and content, right?
If this is not the case, so we can go ahead and save that and it's going to work just the same if you
really want it to be able to test things to see if that conditional logic is working, you could try
instead of is single is page so is single, will work for any detail screen for any post type except
for page and attachment.
So if I say is page, this is going to be false.
So if I refresh, we no longer see the bonus sentence.
But if you went to a individual page.
Right.
So if I went to the about us page now we do see my name is Brad.
Cool.
So really that's all a plug in is you're leveraging the different action hooks and filter hooks that
WordPress makes available to us.
Trust me, there are so many different actions and filters that we can leverage, that you can customize
WordPress in just about any way you can imagine.
This was just a quick example to get your first plug in up and running.
But now that we're familiar with these basics, we can try to do something more useful.
So in our very next lesson, let's begin building the post statistics or word count plug in.
Right.
We saw this in the previous video where it shows you how many words the current post has, how many
characters it has, and about how long it will take to read.
I think building something a bit more useful in real world like this should be a lot of fun and should
be a great learning experience.
Let's keep things rolling and I'll see you then.